#summary PhyloCore presentation page
#labels Featured

PhyloCore library provides tools for manipulating tree collections and taxonomic information. It can be use either with NCBI [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/] or ITIS [http://www.itis.gov/ Itis database] taxonomic database  .

Main features of PhyloCore are:
 * Taxon manipulation:  
   * Getting all scientific names of taxa
   * Getting synonyms, homonyms and commons name from a scientific taxa name
   * Getting parents and children  
   * Getting rank
 * Tree manipulations:
   * Getting all taxa (Taxa objects) from newick tree format
   * Getting synonyms, commons names and homonyms from tree
   * Getting NetworkX arborescence (useful for graph manipulations)
 * Tree collection mapulations:
   * Support of phylip and nexus format
   * Getting bad formated tree names
   * Getting statistics (number for taxa, number of synonyms...)
   * Getting trees/taxa matrix

= DjangoPhylocore vs PhyloCore =

DjangoPhylocore can not easily be used outside a django project. We thus create PhyloCore,  a wrapper against DjangoPhylocore, that provides the same functionnalities and can be uses outside a django project. In short, if you developpe a web application upon django, use DjangoPhylocore, otherwise use PhyloCore.

PhyloCore is declined in two version : phylocore_ncbi and phylocore_itis.
The only difference is the taxonomy underlying.

= Dependencies =
PhyloCore relies on Django wich is written in Python. So, you need Python and Django.

PhyloCore is using a database for dealing with taxonomy. Please install SQLite3 or MySQL
and their python wrapper : [http://sourceforge.net/projects/mysql-python mysql-python] for MySQL or [http://initd.org/pub/software/pysqlite/ pysqlite] for sqlite...

[http://networkx.lanl.gov/ NetworkX] for the graph manipulations. If you have easy_install you can install it via `easy_install networkx` as root.

[http://pyparsing.wikispaces.com/ Pyparsing] for parsing newick collection (`easy_install pyparsing`)

You can check whether those dependencies have been successfully installed by typing those 
lines into the python interpreter:

{{{
>>> import sqlite3
>>> import django
>>> import networkx
>>> import pyparsing
}}}

In order to get matrix working, you will need the "convert" program from [http://www.imagemagick.org/script/index.php ImageMagick] or cairo python librairies[http://cairographics.org/pycairo/].

= Installation =
First of all, download an install [http://www.djangoproject.com/download/ Django 1.0].

Then, checkout the svn repository:
{{{
svn checkout http://taxomanie.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/ taxomanie
}}}

Go to the PhyloCore folder and launch the `install` script:
{{{
cd taxomanie/taxomanie-1.0
sudo ./install
}}}

This will create symbolic link into your $PYTHONPATH (/usr/local/lib/pythonX.X/site-packages)

=== Installing NCBI taxonomy ===

Go to phyloexplorer/ncbi to install NCBI taxonomy and type those commands :

{{{
python manage.py install -v
}}}

This will download the taxonomy from the web and build the database.

=== Installing ITIS taxonomy ===

Go to phyloexplorer/itis to install ITIS taxonomy and type those commands :

{{{
python manage.py install -v
}}}
This will download the taxonomy from the web and build the database.

=== Verification ===

In order to verify that the installation goes well, put this line into your shell:

for ncbi:
{{{
( cd /tmp ; python -c "from phylocore_ncbi import *" )
}}}


for itis:
{{{
( cd /tmp ; python -c "from phylocore_itis import *" )
}}}

if nothing shows up then you're good. Congratulation !

== Using mysql ==

By default, PhyloCore is configured for sqlite3. 
If you want to use mysql (for deploying reasons), you have to go to
phylocore/phylocore_ncbi and/or phylocore/phylocore_itis and edit the
setting.py file.

Change 'sqlite3' by 'mysql' and fill the line bellow.

Create the database

{{{
mysql -u user -p -e "CREATE DATABASE database_name CHARACTER SET utf8;"
}}}

*Utf-8 is important as django stores all it's data into this charset. *

Then install the taxonomy into the database by typing

{{{
python manage.py install -v
}}}

=== configuring matrix image conversion ===

Insert in the (taxomanie-1.0/phyloexplorer/ncbi/settings.py / taxomanie-1.0/phyloexplorer/itis/settings.py) settings files the line :

{{{
CONVERT_SVG_BIN = 'convert'
}}}

this tell phyloexplorer which conversion program to use (here the convert command from image magick). You can use all commands (prog) with the followinging syntax : 

{{{
prog img.svg img.png
}}}

As an alternative to imagemagick you can for instance use the script provided with phyloexplorer that rely on the cairo library. In this case add the following line in your setting files

{{{
CONVERT_SVG_BIN = 'svg2png'
}}}
and ensure that svg2png is in your PATH

= Going further =

Using PhyloExplorer

Next, follow the [PhyloCoreTutorial tutorial].

Developpers, follow the [PhyloCoreDeveloppers developpers guide].